--- Page 1 ---
Multiple Endpoints in 
Clinical Trials 
Guidance for Industry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
Food and Drug Administration 
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) 
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) 
 
 
October 2022 
Biostatistics

--- Page 2 ---
Multiple Endpoints in 
Clinical Trials 
 
 
Guidance for Industry 
 
 
Additional copies are available from: 
 
Office of Communications, Division of Drug Information  
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research 
Food and Drug Administration 
10001 New Hampshire Ave., Hillandale Bldg., 4th Floor  
Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002  
Phone: 855-543-3784 or 301-796-3400; Fax: 301-431-6353 
Email: druginfo@fda.hhs.gov  
https://www.fda.gov/drugs/guidance-compliance-regulatory-information/guidances-drugs  
 
and/or 
 
Office of Communication, Outreach and Development  
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research 
 Food and Drug Administration 
10903 New Hampshire Ave., Bldg. 71, Room 3128 
Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002 
Phone: 800-835-4709 or 240-402-8010 
Email: ocod@fda.hhs.gov 
https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/guidance-compliance-regulatory-information-biologics/biologics-guidances  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
Food and Drug Administration 
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) 
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) 
 
 October 2022 
Biostatistics

--- Page 3 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
MULTIPLE ENDPOINTS IN CLINICAL TRIALS ................................................................ 1 
I. INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1 
II. BACKGROUND AND SCOPE ....................................................................................... 2 
A. Demonstrating the Study Objective of Effectiveness .................................................................. 3 
B. Type I Error ................................................................................................................................... 4 
C. Multiplicity ..................................................................................................................................... 5 
III. MULTIPLE ENDPOINTS: GENERAL PRINCIPLES ............................................... 6 
A. The Hierarchy of Families of Endpoints ...................................................................................... 6 
1.  Primary Endpoint Family ................................................................................................................ 6 
2. Secondary and Exploratory Endpoint Families ............................................................................... 7 
3.  Selecting and Interpreting the Endpoints in the Primary and Secondary Endpoint Families ......... 7 
B. Type II Error Rate and Sample Size ............................................................................................ 8 
C. Types of Multiple Endpoints ......................................................................................................... 8 
1. When Demonstration of Treatment Effects on Two or More Distinct Endpoints Is Recommended 
to Establish Clinical Benefit (Co-Primary Endpoints) ......................................................................... 9 
2. When Demonstration of a Treatment Effect on at Least One of Several Primary Endpoints Is 
Sufficient ............................................................................................................................................... 9 
3. Composite Endpoints ..................................................................................................................... 10 
4. Multi-Component Endpoints .......................................................................................................... 11 
5. Clinically Critical Endpoints Too Infrequent for Use as a Primary Endpoint .............................. 12 
D. The Individual Components of Composite and Multi-Component Endpoints ...................... 12 
1. Evaluating and Reporting the Results of Composite Endpoints .................................................... 12 
2. Evaluating and Reporting the Results on Other Multi-Component Endpoints .............................. 12 
IV. METHODOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS ............................................................. 13 
V. SUMMARY ..................................................................................................................... 14 
VI. GENERAL REFERENCES ........................................................................................... 15 
APPENDIX: STATISTICAL METHODS ............................................................................... 18 
1. The Bonferroni Method .................................................................................................................. 18 
2. The Holm Procedure ...................................................................................................................... 18 
3. The Hochberg Procedure ............................................................................................................... 19 
4. Prospective Alpha Allocation Scheme ........................................................................................... 20 
5. The Fixed-Sequence Method .......................................................................................................... 20 
6. Resampling-Based, Multiple-Testing Procedures .......................................................................... 21 
7. Gatekeeping Testing Strategies ...................................................................................................... 21 
8. Graphical Approaches Based on Sequentially Rejective Tests ...................................................... 23

--- Page 4 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 1 
Multiple Endpoints in Clinical Trials 
Guidance for Industry1 
 
 
This guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) on 
this topic. It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on FDA or the public. You can 
use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. To 
discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA office responsible for this guidance as listed on the title 
page.  
 
 
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
 
This guidance provides sponsors and review staff with the Agency’s thinking about the problems 
posed by multiple endpoints in the analysis and interpretation of study results and how these 
problems can be managed in clinical trials for human drugs, including drugs subject to licensing 
as biological products. Most clinical trials performed in drug development contain multiple 
endpoints to assess the effects of the drug and to document the ability of the drug to favorably 
affect one or more disease characteristics. When more than one endpoint is analyzed in a single 
trial, the likelihood of making false conclusions about a drug’s effects with respect to one or 
more of those endpoints could increase if there is no appropriate adjustment for multiplicity. The 
purpose of this guidance is to describe various strategies for grouping and ordering endpoints for 
analysis of a drug’s effects and applying some well-recognized statistical methods for managing 
multiplicity within a study to control the chance of making erroneous conclusions about a drug’s 
effects. Basing a conclusion on an analysis where the risk of false conclusions has not been 
appropriately controlled can lead to false or misleading representations regarding a drug’s 
effects.  
 
The ICH guidance for industry E9 Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials (September 1998)2 is 
a broad ranging guidance that includes discussion of multiple endpoints. This guidance on 
multiple endpoints in clinical trials for human drugs provides greater detail on the topic. The 
issuance of this guidance represents partial fulfillment of an FDA commitment under the Food 
and Drug Administration Amendments Act (FDAAA) of 2007. 
 
 
1 This guidance has been prepared by the Office of Biostatistics in the Office of Translational Sciences in the Center 
for Drug Evaluation and Research in cooperation with the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research at the Food 
and Drug Administration. 
 
2 The ICH E9 guidance is available on the FDA guidance web page under the topic ICH – Efficacy. We update 
guidances periodically. For the most recent version of a guidance, check the FDA guidance web page at 
https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents.

--- Page 5 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 2 
In general, FDA’s guidance documents do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. 
Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only 
as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of 
the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but 
not required.  
 
 
II. BACKGROUND AND SCOPE 
 
Efficacy endpoints are measures designed to reflect the intended effects of a drug. They include 
assessments of clinical events (e.g., mortality, stroke, pulmonary exacerbation, venous 
thromboembolism), symptoms (e.g., pain, dyspnea, symptoms of depression), measures of 
function (e.g., ability to walk or exercise), or surrogate endpoints that are reasonably likely or 
expected to predict a clinical benefit.  
 
Because most diseases can potentially cause more than one clinical event, symptom, and/or 
altered function, many trials are designed to examine the effect of a drug on more than one 
aspect of the disease. In some cases, efficacy cannot be adequately established based on a single 
disease aspect, and the study should use either an endpoint that incorporates multiple aspects of 
the disease into a single endpoint or effects should be demonstrated on multiple endpoints. In 
other cases, an effect on any of several endpoints could be sufficient to support approval of a 
marketing application. 
 
Failure to account for multiplicity when there are several endpoints evaluated in a study can 
increase the chance of false conclusions regarding the effects of the drug. The regulatory concern 
regarding multiplicity arises principally in the evaluation of clinical trials intended to 
demonstrate effectiveness supporting drug approval and claims in FDA-approved labeling; 
however, this issue is important for trials throughout the drug development process. For instance, 
if safety outcomes are to be assessed via hypothesis testing, they would be subject to the 
multiplicity considerations described in this guidance. Multiplicity problems for safety analyses 
that are not part of a prespecified set of hypotheses for formal statistical testing are outside the 
scope of this guidance. 
 
In the following sections, the issues of multiple endpoints and methods to address them are 
discussed. The issues of multiplicity and methods that apply to multiple endpoints also generally 
apply to other sources of multiplicity, including other estimand3 attributes (e.g., multiple doses, 
time points, or study population subgroups); however, these other sources of multiplicity will not 
be specifically addressed in this guidance. Furthermore, there may be different considerations 
related to multiplicity in certain unique settings, such as the evaluation of multiple different 
drugs for a single disease in a master protocol, that are not addressed in this guidance. This 
guidance focuses on the analysis and interpretation of multiple endpoints within a single clinical 
trial.  
 
 
3 See the ICH Guidance for Industry E9(R1) Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials: Addendum: Estimands and 
Sensitivity Analysis in Clinical Trials (May 2021).

--- Page 6 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 3 
A. Demonstrating the Study Objective of Effectiveness 
 
A conclusion that a study has demonstrated an intended effect of a drug is critical to meeting the 
legal standard for substantial evidence of effectiveness required to support approval of a new 
drug (i.e., “… adequate and well-controlled investigations…on the basis of which it could fairly 
and responsibly be concluded…that the drug will have the effect it purports…to have…”) 
(section 505(d) of the FD&C Act).4 FDA regulations further establish that to be adequate and 
well controlled, a clinical study of a drug must include, among other things, “an analysis of the 
results of the study adequate to assess the effects of the drug,” a requirement that furthers the 
“purpose of conducting clinical investigations of a drug,” which is “to distinguish the effect of a 
drug from other influences, such as spontaneous change in the course of the disease, placebo 
effect, or biased observation.”5 There are also other important factors (e.g., clinical relevance of 
the endpoint and estimated effect, relevant external information) that are considered in 
evaluating substantial evidence of effectiveness beyond the results of hypothesis tests in a single 
trial. A more general discussion of demonstrating substantial evidence of effectiveness can be 
found in other FDA guidance documents6 and is outside the scope of this document. 
 
Hypothesis testing is commonly used to address the uncertainty in the assessment of a treatment 
effect on a chosen endpoint. This approach begins with stating the relevant hypotheses for a 
chosen endpoint. In the simplest situation where the aim is to demonstrate the superiority of a 
test drug over control, two mutually exclusive hypotheses are specified for the endpoint in 
advance of conducting a clinical trial:  
 
• One hypothesis, the null hypothesis, states that there is no treatment effect on the chosen 
endpoint.  
 
• The other hypothesis is called the alternative hypothesis and posits that there is at least 
some treatment effect of the test drug. 
 
This pair of hypotheses are tested using a prespecified statistical test to determine whether the 
trial results are sufficiently unlikely under the null hypothesis so that the null hypothesis can be 
rejected in favor of the alternative hypothesis. Note that if the null hypothesis is not rejected, it 
does not necessarily mean that the null hypothesis is true. There are many other potential reasons 
that could lead to a failure to reject the null hypothesis, such as insufficient sample size. 
 
4 See 21 U.S.C. 355. Biological products are licensed based on a demonstration of safety, purity , and potency 
(section 351(a)(2)(C) of the Public Health Service Act, 42 USC 262(a)(2)(C)). Potency has long been interpreted to 
include effectiveness (21 CFR 600.3(s)). In 1972, FDA initiated a review of the safety and effectiveness of all 
previously licensed biological products. The Agency stated then that proof of effectiveness would consist of 
controlled clinical investigations as defined in the provision for adequate and well -controlled studies for new drugs 
(21 CFR 314.126), unless waived as not applicable to the biological product or essen tial to the validity of the study 
when an alternative method is adequate to substantiate effectiveness.” (37 FR 16681, August 18, 1972).  
 
5 See 21 CFR 314.126(b)(7), 314.126(a). 
  
6 See the FDA draft guidance for industry Demonstrating Substantial Evidence of Effectiveness for Human Drug 
and Biological Products (December 2019). When final, this guidance will represent the FDA’s current thinking on 
this topic.

--- Page 7 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 4 
 
Sometimes (e.g., in some vaccine trials), demonstration of an effect of at least some minimum 
size is considered critical for approval of a drug. In this case, if formal statistical testing is used 
for the demonstration, the null hypothesis might be modified to incorporate the smallest 
clinically meaningful effect that could be accepted.  
 
This guidance focuses on a statistical framework based on hypothesis testing. Sponsors should 
discuss early with FDA plans to use other approaches (e.g., Bayesian approaches) for a specific 
development program such as for pediatrics.  
 
B. Type I Error 
 
The rejection of the null hypothesis supports the study conclusion that there is a difference 
between treatment groups but does not constitute absolute proof that the null hypothesis is false. 
There is always some possibility of mistakenly rejecting the null hypothesis when it is, in fact, 
true. Such an erroneous conclusion is called a Type I error. For an endpoint, the probability of 
falsely rejecting its null hypothesis and, thus, concluding that there is a treatment effect due to 
the drug on this endpoint when, in fact, there is none, is called the Type I error probability or 
Type I error rate for this endpoint. The significance level, denoted as alpha (), is the threshold 
below which the Type I error rate should be controlled. Null hypothesis rejection is based on a 
determination that the probability of observing a result at least as extreme as the result of the 
study assuming the null hypothesis is true (the p-value) is sufficiently low (usually no larger than 
). 
 
The alternative hypothesis can be one-sided or two-sided, and statistical tests are performed 
accordingly. For two-sided hypothesis statistical tests, the Type I error probability refers to the 
probability of concluding that there is a difference (beneficial or harmful) between the drug and 
control when there is no difference. For one-sided hypothesis tests, the Type I error probability 
refers to the probability of concluding specifically that there is a beneficial difference due to the 
drug when there is not. The most widely used values for  are 0.05 for two-sided tests and 0.025 
for one-sided tests. In the case of two-sided tests, an  of 0.05 means that the probability of 
falsely concluding that the drug differs from the control in either direction (benefit or harm) 
when no difference exists is no more than 5%, or 1 chance in 20. In the case of one-sided tests, 
an  of 0.025 means that the probability of falsely concluding a beneficial effect of the drug 
when none exists is no more than 2.5%, or 1 chance in 40. Use of a two-sided test with an  of 
0.05 that allocates the  symmetrically to each side generally also ensures that the probability of 
falsely concluding benefit when there is none is no more than approximately 2.5% (1 chance in 
40). These Type I error rates are correct if the statistical test is appropriate. If there are issues 
with the statistical test (e.g., the underlying assumptions do not hold), the Type I error rate could 
be even larger. 
 
FDA’s concern for controlling the Type I error probability is to minimize the chances of a false 
favorable conclusion for any primary or secondary endpoints (see section III.), regardless of 
which and how many of these endpoints in the study have no effect. The Type I error probability 
associated with testing multiple endpoints of a study is called overall Type I error probability. 
The rationale for controlling this probability is given in the next subsection (section II.C.). When

--- Page 8 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 5 
there is more than one primary or secondary endpoint, it is important to ensure that the 
evaluation of multiple hypotheses will not lead to inflation of the study’s overall Type I error 
probability (or rate) relative to the planned level. To control the Type I error rate, it is critical that 
sponsors prospectively specify the following: 
 
• all endpoints in the primary and secondary families (see section III. for definitions). 
  
• all data analyses that will be performed to test hypotheses about the prespecified 
endpoints, regardless of whether they are considered primary or secondary. 
 
For a study with multiple endpoints, the analysis plan should describe the testing procedure for 
the hypotheses being tested with a proper control of overall Type I error rate.  
 
C. Multiplicity 
 
In a clinical trial with a single endpoint tested at two-sided α = 0.05, the probability of finding a 
difference between the treatment group and a control group in favor of the treatment group when 
no difference exists in the population is 0.025 (a 2.5% chance). That is, there is a 97.5% chance 
of appropriately not finding a favorable effect if there is no true effect for this endpoint. By 
contrast, if there are two independent endpoints, each tested at two-sided α = 0.05, and if success 
on either endpoint by itself would lead to a conclusion of a drug effect, the chance of 
appropriately not finding a favorable effect on both endpoints together is thus 0.975 * 0.975, 
which is approximately 0.95, and so the probability of falsely finding a favorable effect on at 
least one endpoint is approximately 0.05. Thus, the overall Type I error rate in favor of the drug 
nearly doubles when two independent endpoints are tested. This higher-than-intended overall 
Type I error rate when multiple tests are conducted without adjustment is called the multiplicity 
problem. Thus, without correction for multiplicity, the chance of making a Type I error for this 
example study as a whole would rise to approximately as high as 5% in favor of the drug, and, 
therefore, the overall Type I error rate would not be adequately controlled. The problem is 
exacerbated when more than two endpoints are considered. For example, for three independent 
endpoints, the Type I error rate is 1 - (0.975 * 0.975 * 0.975), which is about 7%. For ten 
independent endpoints, the Type I error rate is about 22%. If the multiple endpoints are 
correlated, the overall Type I error rate is also inflated but potentially by a lesser degree.  
 
Even when a single outcome variable is being assessed, if multiple facets of that outcome are 
analyzed (e.g., multiple dose groups, multiple time points, or multiple subject subgroups based 
on demographic or other characteristics) and if any one of the analyses is used to conclude that 
the drug has been shown to produce a beneficial effect, the multiplicity of analyses may cause 
inflation of the Type I error rate. Hence, by inflating the Type I error rate, multiplicity produces 
uncertainty in interpretation of the study results such that the conclusions about whether 
effectiveness has been demonstrated in the study become unreliable. There are various 
approaches that can be planned prospectively and applied to maintain the overall Type I error 
rate at 2.5% or below. 
 
For controlling multiplicity, an important principle is to first prospectively specify all planned 
endpoints, time points, analysis populations, doses, and analyses; then, once these factors are

--- Page 9 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 6 
specified, appropriate adjustments for multiple endpoints and analyses can be selected, 
prespecified, and applied, as appropriate. Changes in the analytic plan to perform additional 
analyses can reintroduce a multiplicity problem that can negatively impact the ability to interpret 
the study’s results unless these changes are made prior to data analysis and appropriate 
multiplicity adjustments are performed. The statistical analysis plan should not be changed after 
unmasking of treatment assignments and performing statistical analyses.  
  
A focus of this guidance is control of the Type I error rate for the prespecified set of endpoints 
(i.e., primary and secondary endpoints) of a clinical trial to ensure that the major findings of a 
clinical trial are well supported, and the effects of the drug have been demonstrated. Analyses 
that explicate the characteristics of an effect on an endpoint that has been demonstrated—such as 
time of onset, distribution of effect sizes across the population, effects in subgroups, and effects 
on the components of a composite endpoint—are all descriptive to provide a deeper 
understanding of the nature of that endpoint finding, and do not extend to effects outside of that 
endpoint. These descriptive analyses can be considered for inclusion in the FDA-approved 
labeling without presenting p-values.  
 
Of note, there is not always a clear-cut distinction between an analysis closely related to a major 
finding and one that demonstrates additional effects. Therefore, when definitive conclusions are 
to be drawn, such analyses should be prespecified and appropriately included in the prespecified 
multiple-testing strategy. A descriptive analysis that is not included in the prespecified multiple-
testing strategy should not be presented in FDA-approved labeling in ways that imply a 
statistically rigorous conclusion or convey certainty about the effects that are not supported by 
that trial. Descriptive analyses are not the subject of this guidance and are not addressed in detail. 
 
 
III. MULTIPLE ENDPOINTS: GENERAL PRINCIPLES 
 
A. The Hierarchy of Families of Endpoints 
 
Endpoints in adequate and well-controlled drug trials are usually grouped hierarchically, often 
according to their clinical importance, but also taking into consideration the expected frequency 
of the endpoint events and anticipated drug effects. The critical determination for grouping 
endpoints is whether they are intended to establish effectiveness to support approval or intended 
to demonstrate additional meaningful effects. Endpoints critical to establish effectiveness for 
approval are often designated as primary endpoints. Secondary endpoints can provide useful 
description to support the primary endpoint(s) and/or demonstrate additional clinically important 
effects. The third category in the hierarchy includes all other endpoints, which are referred to as 
exploratory. Exploratory endpoints can include endpoints for research purposes or for new 
hypotheses generation. Each category in the hierarchy can contain a single endpoint or a family 
of endpoints. 
  
1.  Primary Endpoint Family 
 
The endpoint(s) that establish the effect(s) of the drug and will be the basis for concluding that 
the study meets its objective are designated the primary endpoint family. When there is a single

--- Page 10 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 7 
prespecified primary endpoint, there are no multiple-endpoint-related multiplicity issues in the 
determination that the study achieves its objective.  
 
Multiple primary endpoints occur in three ways, further described in section III.C. The first is 
when there are multiple primary endpoints, and each endpoint could be sufficient on its own to 
establish the drug’s efficacy. These multiple endpoints thus correspond to multiple chances of 
success, and in this case, failure to adjust for multiplicity can lead to Type I error rate inflation 
and a false conclusion that the drug is effective. The second is when the determination of 
effectiveness depends on success on all primary endpoints, when there are two or more primary 
endpoints. In this setting, there are no multiplicity issues related to primary endpoints, as there is 
only one path that leads to a successful outcome for the trial and therefore, no concern with Type 
I error rate inflation. In the third, critical aspects of effectiveness can be combined into a single 
primary composite or other multicomponent endpoint, thereby avoiding multiple-endpoint-
related multiplicity issues. For example, in many cardiovascular studies it is usual to combine 
several endpoints (e.g., cardiovascular death, heart attack, and stroke) into a single composite 
endpoint that is primary and to consider death a secondary endpoint (see section III.A.2.).  
 
2. Secondary and Exploratory Endpoint Families 
 
When an effect on the primary endpoint is shown, the secondary endpoints can be formally 
tested. A secondary endpoint could be a clinical effect related to the primary endpoint that 
extends the understanding of that effect (e.g., an effect on survival when a cardiovascular drug 
has shown an effect on the primary endpoint of heart failure-related hospitalizations) or provide 
evidence of a clinical benefit distinct from the effect shown by the primary endpoint (e.g., a 
disability endpoint in a multiple sclerosis treatment trial in which relapse rate is the primary 
endpoint). As a general principle, it is important to include the secondary endpoints that can 
potentially provide evidence of additional effects of the drug on the disease or condition in the 
Type I error control plan.  
 
In general, it may be desirable to limit the number of secondary endpoints, because if 
multiplicity adjustments are used, the chance of demonstrating an effect on any secondary 
endpoint may become increasingly small as the number of secondary endpoints increases, or if a 
hierarchy is used, the important hypotheses further down the hierarchy might never get tested. 
 
Exploratory endpoints do not need multiplicity adjustment because they are generally not used to 
support conclusions. 
 
3.  Selecting and Interpreting the Endpoints in the Primary and Secondary Endpoint 
Families 
 
Positive results on the secondary endpoints can be interpretable if there is first a demonstration 
of a treatment effect on the primary endpoint family (O’Neill 1997). The overall Type I error rate 
should control for the primary and secondary endpoint families all together. 
 
Occasionally, there are trials where a clinically important endpoint (e.g., mortality or irreversible 
morbidity) is expected to have too few events to provide adequate power for the trial, while a

--- Page 11 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 8 
different clinically important endpoint occurs more frequently or earlier in the disease process, 
leading to larger power. In such cases, generally the endpoint with inadequate power for 
detection is classified as a secondary endpoint, while the endpoint for which larger power is 
expected is classified as the primary endpoint. For example, in some oncology trials, 
progression-free survival is selected as the primary endpoint, and overall survival is selected as 
the secondary endpoint because an effect of treatment on disease progression is clinically 
important and may be more readily demonstrable, may be detected earlier, and may often be 
larger because the observed effect on overall survival can be impacted by subsequent treatment 
post progression. 
 
B. Type II Error Rate and Sample Size 
 
FDA is also concerned with the risk of making a Type II error, which is failing to show an effect 
of a drug where there actually is one. The study power is the probability that the study will be 
successful if a treatment effect of a specified size is in fact present. The desired power is an 
important factor in determining the sample size, especially for the primary endpoints.  
 
The sample size of a study is generally chosen to provide a reasonably high power to show a 
treatment effect if an effect of a specified size on the primary endpoint(s) is in fact present. The 
sample size calculation may need to account for the statistical adjustments to control the Type I 
error rate for multiplicity. For example, if a lower  level is used for a study endpoint, then the 
sample size should be adjusted to provide desired statistical power for this endpoint.  
 
Using two or more endpoints for which demonstration of an effect on each is recommended to 
support regulatory approval (called co-primary endpoints; see section III.C.1. below) will 
increase the Type II error rate and decrease study power. For example, assume two endpoints 
have the same effect size and the study sample size is selected to provide 80% power to show 
success on each of these two endpoints. If the endpoints are independent, the power to show 
success on both will be approximately 64% (0.8 x 0.8); i.e., the likelihood of the study failing to 
support a conclusion of a favorable drug effect when such an effect existed (the Type II error 
rate) would be 36%. To maintain desired study power, a larger sample size is recommended, and 
the individual endpoints could be powered at approximately 90% to ensure the probability of 
success is at least 80%. The calculation would be different if the endpoints were highly 
positively correlated or the power was not equal for each endpoint. 
 
C. Types of Multiple Endpoints  
 
Multiple endpoints can be used when demonstration of a drug effect on more than one disease 
aspect or outcome is critical for determining that the drug confers a clinical benefit. Multiple 
endpoints can also be used when (1) there are several important aspects of a disease or several 
ways to assess an important aspect, (2) it may not be known in advance which aspect is more 
likely to show a drug effect, and (3) an effect on any one endpoint will be sufficient as evidence 
of effectiveness to support approval. In some cases, multiple aspects of a disease can 
appropriately be combined into a single endpoint, but subsequent analysis examining each 
disease aspect or component of this endpoint is generally important for an adequate 
understanding of the drug’s effect. These circumstances are discussed in more detail below.

--- Page 12 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 9 
 
1. When Demonstration of Treatment Effects on Two or More Distinct Endpoints Is 
Recommended to Establish Clinical Benefit (Co-Primary Endpoints) 
 
For some disorders, there are two or more different features that are so critically important to the 
disease under study that a drug will not be considered effective without demonstration of a 
treatment effect on all of these disease features. The term used in this guidance to describe this 
circumstance of multiple primary endpoints is co-primary endpoints. Multiple primary endpoints 
become co-primary endpoints when demonstrating an effect on each of the endpoints is critical 
to concluding that a drug is effective. 
 
Therapies for the acute treatment of migraine headaches illustrate this circumstance. Although 
pain is the most prominent feature, migraine headaches are also characterized by the presence of 
photophobia, phonophobia, and/or nausea, all of which are clinically important. Which of the 
three is most clinically important varies among individuals. An approach to studying acute 
treatments for migraine headaches is to consider a drug effective for migraines only if the 
proportion of subjects with no headache pain at 2 hours after dosing and the proportion of 
subjects with absence of the most bothersome associated symptom at 2 hours after dosing are 
both shown to be improved by the drug treatment. Another approach could be to evaluate the 
drug effect on a response endpoint where response is defined by the absence of both pain and an 
individually specified second symptom within an individual subject. This approach would utilize 
a single multi-component endpoint rather than co-primary endpoints. 
 
Trials of combination vaccines are a situation in which co-primary endpoints are applicable. 
These vaccine trials are typically designed and powered for demonstration of a successful 
outcome on effectiveness endpoints for each pathogen against which the vaccine is intended to 
provide protection. 
 
As discussed in section III.B., there is no multiplicity problem when the study is designed to 
demonstrate efficacy on all of the separate endpoints. However, co-primary endpoint testing 
increases the Type II error rate. In general, unless clinically very important, the use of more than 
two co-primary endpoints should be carefully considered because of the loss of power. 
 
There have been suggestions that the statistical testing criteria for each co-primary endpoint 
could be increased (e.g., testing at an  of 0.06 or 0.07) when the targeted  is 0.05 to 
accommodate the loss in statistical power arising from the need to show an effect on both 
endpoints. Increasing  for each co-primary endpoint is not acceptable because doing so may 
undermine the ability to interpret a treatment effect on each disease aspect considered critical to 
show that the drug is effective in support of approval.  
 
2. When Demonstration of a Treatment Effect on at Least One of Several Primary 
Endpoints Is Sufficient 
 
Many diseases have multiple sequelae, and an effect demonstrated on any one of these aspects 
could support a conclusion of effectiveness. Selection of a single primary endpoint may be 
difficult, however, if the aspect of a disease that will be responsive to the drug or the evaluation

--- Page 13 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 10 
method that will better detect a treatment effect is not known a priori (at the time of trial design). 
In this circumstance, a study might be designed such that success on any one of several 
endpoints could support a conclusion of effectiveness. This creates a primary endpoint family. 
For example, consider a drug for the treatment of burn wounds where it is not known whether the 
drug will increase the rate of wound closure or reduce scarring, but the demonstration of either 
effect alone would be considered clinically important. A study in this case might have both 
wound closure rate and a scarring measure as separate primary endpoints.  
 
This use of multiple endpoints creates a multiplicity problem because there are several ways for 
the study to successfully demonstrate a treatment effect. Control of the Type I error rate for the 
primary endpoint family is critical. A variety of approaches can be used to address this 
multiplicity problem; the appendix describes and discusses some of these approaches.  
 
3. Composite Endpoints 
 
There are some disorders for which more than one clinical outcome in a clinical trial is 
important, and all outcomes are expected to be affected by the treatment. Rather than using each 
as a separate primary endpoint (creating multiplicity) or selecting just one to be the primary 
endpoint and designating the others as secondary endpoints, it could be appropriate to combine 
those clinical outcomes into a single variable. This is often called a composite endpoint, where 
an endpoint is defined as the occurrence or realization in a subject of any one of the specified 
components. A typical example is a composite of major adverse clinical outcome events in 
cardiovascular trials (e.g., a composite of myocardial infarction, stroke, or death). When the 
components correspond to distinct events, composite endpoints are often assessed as the time to 
first occurrence of any one of the components. If a single statistical test is performed on the 
composite endpoint, no multiplicity problem will occur for this endpoint.  
 
One possible reason for using a composite endpoint is that the incidence of each of the events 
may be too low to allow a study of reasonable size to have adequate power; the composite 
endpoint can provide a substantially higher overall event rate that allows a study with a 
reasonable sample size and study duration to have adequate power. Composite endpoints are 
often used when the goal of treatment is to prevent or delay occurrence of one of several 
clinically important and related events (e.g., use of an anti-platelet drug in subjects with coronary 
artery disease to prevent myocardial infarction, stroke, or death), possibly without knowledge of 
which event(s) may be affected.  
 
The choice of the components of a composite endpoint should be made carefully. The treatment 
effect on the composite event rate can be interpreted as characterizing the overall clinical effect 
when the individual events all have reasonably similar clinical importance. The effect on the 
composite endpoint, however, will not be a reasonable indicator of the effect on all of the 
components or an accurate description of the drug’s benefit if the clinical importance of different 
components is substantially different and the treatment effect is chiefly on the least important 
event. Furthermore, it is possible that a component with greater importance would be adversely 
affected by the treatment, even if one or more event types of lesser importance are favorably 
affected, so that although the overall outcome still has a favorable statistical result, doubt may 
arise about the treatment’s clinical value. In this case, although the overall statistical analysis

--- Page 14 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 11 
indicates the treatment is beneficial, careful examination of the data could call this conclusion 
into question. For this reason, as well as for a greater depth of understanding of the treatment’s 
effects, analyses of the components of the composite endpoint are important (see section III.D.) 
and can influence interpretation of the overall study results. The examination of the components 
is always necessary, but whether multiplicity adjustment should be made depends on the 
purpose. If the intent is to better understand the demonstrated effect on the composite, then no 
adjustment is recommended. In that case, clinical judgment is used to decide whether the benefit 
is clinically meaningful and exceeds risk, and how it will be described in the FDA-approved 
labeling. If the intent is to establish additional effects of the drug, then multiplicity adjustment 
should be made.  
 
4. Multi-Component Endpoints 
 
A multi-component endpoint is a within-subject combination of two or more components. In this 
endpoint, an individual subject’s evaluation is dependent upon observation of all the specified 
components in that subject. A single overall rating or status is then determined according to 
specified rules.  
 
A single overall rating can be formed by some kind of average (either weighted or unweighted) 
across the individual domain scores. An example of a multi-component endpoint is the Positive 
and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) in schizophrenia research. A multi-component endpoint 
can also be a dichotomous (response) endpoint corresponding to an individual subject achieving 
specified criteria on each of the multiple components. For example, the primary endpoint in 
clinical trials of allogeneic pancreatic islet cells for Type 1 diabetes mellitus can be a response 
rate in which subjects are considered responders only if they meet two dichotomous response 
criteria: normal range of HbA1c and elimination of hypoglycemia.  
 
There are more complex endpoint formulations where several, but not all, different features of a 
disease must be positively affected for a subject to be regarded as receiving benefit. For example, 
a positive response for an individual subject might be defined as a certain degree of improvement 
in two specific aspects of a disease along with improvement in at least three out of five 
additional disease features, as in the American College of Rheumatology (ACR) scoring system 
for rheumatoid arthritis.  
 
The use of within-subject multi-component endpoints may be efficient if the treatment effects on 
the different components are generally trending in the same direction within a subject. Study 
power can be adversely affected, however, if there is limited concordance among the endpoints. 
Although multi-component endpoints can provide some gains in efficiency compared to co-
primary endpoints, the appropriateness of a particular within-subject multi-component endpoint 
is generally determined by clinical, rather than statistical, considerations. Similar to the 
assessment of the component endpoints of a composite endpoint in section III.C.3., evaluation of 
the components of a multi-component endpoint may be important but should be subject to pre-
specification and multiplicity adjustment if the intent is to support specific conclusions on how a 
treatment affects specific components (see section III.D.).

--- Page 15 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 12 
5. Clinically Critical Endpoints Too Infrequent for Use as a Primary Endpoint  
 
For many serious diseases, there is an endpoint of such great clinical importance that it is 
unreasonable not to collect and analyze the endpoint data; the usual example is mortality or 
major morbidity events (e.g., stroke, fracture, pulmonary exacerbation). Even if relatively few of 
these events are expected to occur in the trial, they can be included in a composite endpoint (see 
section III.C.3.) and also designated as a planned secondary endpoint to potentially support a 
conclusion regarding effect on that separate endpoint, if the effect of the drug on the composite 
primary endpoint is demonstrated.  
 
D. The Individual Components of Composite and Multi-Component Endpoints 
 
1. Evaluating and Reporting the Results of Composite Endpoints 
 
For composite endpoints whose components correspond to events, an event is usually defined as 
the first occurrence of any of the designated component events. Such composites can be analyzed 
either with comparisons of proportions between study groups at the end of the study or using 
time-to-event analyses. The time-to-event method of analysis is the more common method when, 
within the study’s timeframe of observation, the duration of being event-free is clinically 
meaningful. Although there may be an expectation that the drug will have a favorable effect on 
all the components of a composite endpoint, that is not a certainty. Results for each component 
event should therefore be individually examined and should be included in study reports. These 
analyses will not alter a conclusion about the statistical significance of the composite primary 
endpoint; however, interpretation of the result of the composite endpoint can be uncertain (see 
section III.C.3.). If there is an interest in analyzing one or more of the components of a 
composite endpoint as distinct hypotheses to demonstrate effects of the drug, the hypotheses 
should be part of the prospectively specified statistical analysis plan that accounts for the 
multiplicity this analysis will entail, as described above, for mortality. However, testing for 
individual component endpoints is likely to be underpowered as the sample size or total number 
of events is usually planned for testing the composite endpoint. 
 
Decomposition of the first composite event is often presented to depict how the component 
events constitute the composite event in terms of proportion. For example, in the RENAAL trial 
(Brenner et al. 2001), the primary efficacy endpoint was the first occurrence of the composite 
endpoint of doubling of serum creatinine, end-stage renal disease, or death. Based on such 
decomposition, 52% of the first composite events were doublings of serum creatinine, 19% were 
end-stage renal disease events, and 29% were deaths. However, subjects may experience more 
than one event type. For these subjects, events occurring after the first composite event (e.g., 
end-stage renal disease or death occurring after a doubling of serum creatinine) would not be 
counted in the decomposition. Therefore, evaluation of the individual event types in analyses that 
include all events for the event type of interest (even those that occur after events of other event 
types) is also important. Such analyses could demonstrate a possible additional effect of the drug 
if they are pre-specified, multiplicity is properly accounted for, and the results are interpretable.  
 
2. Evaluating and Reporting the Results on Other Multi-Component Endpoints

--- Page 16 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 13 
As with composite endpoints, understanding which components of a within-subject multi-
component endpoint have contributed most to the overall statistical significance could be 
important to correctly understanding the clinical effects of the drug. Consequently, analysis of 
the study results on the individual components is usually important but, as stated previously, if 
undertaken, should not be presented in FDA-approved labeling in ways that imply a statistically 
rigorous conclusion or convey certainty about the effects that are not supported by that trial. For 
many of these multi-component endpoints, the overall score is regarded as comprehensive and 
clinically interpretable. The individual component scales, however, may or may not be 
independently clinically interpretable. Analyses of specific components or subdomains of a 
clinical outcome assessment as explicit endpoints in the primary or secondary endpoint families 
can be reasonable, contingent on the endpoint being clinically interpretable. Pre-specification of 
specific components or subdomains as endpoints with appropriate multiplicity control is 
recommended if the intent is to demonstrate an effect of a drug on one or more of these 
endpoints in addition to the overall multi-component endpoint.  
 
 
IV. METHODOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
A variety of situations in which multiplicity arises have been discussed in sections II. and III.  
When there is a family of endpoints (discussed in section III.A.), the probability of erroneously 
finding a statistically significant treatment effect in at least one endpoint regardless of the 
presence or absence of treatment effects in the other endpoints is the overall Type I error rate. 
This error rate is typically held to 0.05 (or 0.025 for one-sided tests). Statistical methods that 
control this error rate at the desired level can permit an effectiveness conclusion on individual 
endpoints.  
 
There are many common statistical methods for addressing multiple-endpoint-related 
multiplicity problems (Hochberg and Tamhane 1987). The appendix presents some of the 
commonly considered methods. Examples include the Bonferroni, Holm (Holm 1979), and 
Hochberg (Hochberg 1988) procedures, which do not assume any hierarchy among the tested 
null hypotheses (i.e., any individual null hypothesis in the family can be rejected regardless of 
the rejection of other hypotheses). Other viable methods apply a combination of partial alpha 
allocation and hierarchies, such as graphical methods (Bretz et al. 2009) that are presented in the 
appendix. If finding a statistically significant treatment effect in any one of the considered 
endpoints is considered a success, then methods that appropriately adjust for multiplicity across 
the family of endpoints can be applicable. 
 
However, if endpoints are ordered based on clinical importance or logically related, then 
different methods can be recommended (e.g., Pocock et al. 2012). For example, in the simple 
case where there is one primary and one secondary endpoint, a hierarchical testing approach can 
be used. Some methodologies have been developed to account for more complex logical/ 
hierarchical relationships among the endpoints such as graphical approaches (e.g., Bretz et al. 
2009) and mixture gatekeeping procedures (Dmitrienko et al. 2008). The graphical method has a 
sequential testing algorithm and makes it possible to visualize the testing process via a graph.

--- Page 17 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 14 
In some cases, a primary endpoint can be tested for non-inferiority (with a fixed margin), 
followed by testing it for superiority. If this endpoint is the only endpoint being tested, then non-
inferiority and superiority can be tested without multiplicity adjustment because the null 
hypotheses of non-inferiority and superiority are naturally ordered, and the two tests apply to the 
one hierarchy considered for this endpoint. However, if at least one more endpoint is included 
for testing, then multiplicity issues arise, and adjustments should be made to control the overall 
Type I error probability. For example, the tests could be ordered in a single hierarchy where the 
additional endpoint(s) are tested after the superiority hypothesis for the primary endpoint. Or, 
alternatively, testing could proceed to both the superiority hypothesis for the primary endpoint 
and to the hypotheses for the additional endpoints, with alpha allocation across these multiple 
hypotheses. To see why such alpha allocation can be applicable, suppose the drug is non-inferior 
to the active control with respect to the primary endpoint, but the drug is neither superior to the 
active control for the primary endpoint nor non-inferior to the active control for the secondary 
endpoint. Thus, a Type I error could occur with either of these hypothesis tests. If both of these 
were tested at 0.05, the probability of at least one of these leading to a spurious conclusion would 
be greater than 0.05. Thus, there should be appropriate control in some manner (e.g., test the 
secondary endpoint only if the primary endpoint superiority is shown or split alpha between the 
two tests). Additional discussion on this special case and on other methodological considerations 
is provided in the appendix.  
 
 
V. SUMMARY  
 
Making a false positive conclusion about effectiveness (i.e., falsely concluding that a drug has a 
positive treatment effect when it does not) is a major concern. A common approach is to control 
the Type I error rate at less than 5% (1 in 20 chance) for a false conclusion that there is a 
treatment difference or 2.5% (1 in 40 chance) for a false positive conclusion about effectiveness. 
As the number of endpoints or analyses increases, the Type I error rate can increase well beyond 
2.5% due to multiplicity. Multiplicity adjustments, as described in this guidance, provide means 
for controlling the Type I error rate when the drug effect is evaluated in multiple endpoints. 
There are many strategies and methods that can be used, as appropriate, as described in this 
guidance. Each of these methods has advantages and disadvantages, and the selection of suitable 
strategies and methods is a challenge that should be addressed at the study-planning stage. 
Statistical expertise should be enlisted to help choose the most appropriate approach. Failing to 
appropriately control the Type I error rate may increase the risk of a false positive conclusion; 
this guidance is intended to clarify when and how multiplicity due to multiple endpoints should 
be managed to avoid reaching such false conclusions.

--- Page 18 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 15 
VI. GENERAL REFERENCES 1 
 2 
Alosh M, F Bretz, and M Huque, 2014, Advanced multiplicity adjustment methods in clinical 3 
trials, Statistics in Medicine, 33(4): 693-713. 4 
 5 
Bauer P, 1991, Multiple testing in clinical trials, Statistics in Medicine, 10: 871-890. 6 
Bretz, F, T Hothorn, and P Westfall, Multiple Comparisons Using R, Boca Raton (FL): Chapman 7 
and Hall/CRC. 8 
 9 
Brenner BM, ME Cooper, D de Zeeuw, WF Keane, WE Mitch, H-H Parving, G Remuzzi, SM 10 
Snapinn, Z Zhang, and S Shahinfar, 2001, Effects of Losartan on Renal and Cardiovascular 11 
Outcomes in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes and Nephropathy, New England Journal of 12 
Medicine, 345:861-869. 13 
 14 
Bretz F, W Maurer, W Brannath, and M Posch, 2009, A graphical approach to sequentially 15 
rejective multiple test procedures, Statistics in Medicine, 28: 586-604. 16 
 17 
Bretz F, M Posch, E Glimm, F Klinglmueller, W Maurer, and K Rohmeyer, 2011, Graphical 18 
approaches for multiple comparison procedures using weighted Bonferroni, Simes, or parametric 19 
tests, Biometrical Journal, 53(6): 894-913. 20 
 21 
Committee For Proprietary Medicinal Products, 2002, Points to consider on multiplicity issues in 22 
clinical trials, London: The European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products, accessed 23 
December 1, 2020, 24 
http://www.emea.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Scientific_guideline/2009/09/WC50025 
003640.pdf. 26 
 27 
Dahlöf G, RB Devereux, SE Kjeldsen, S Julius, G Beevers, U de Faire, F Fyhrquist, H Ibsen, K 28 
Kristiansson, O Lederballe-Pedersen, LH Lindholm, MS Nieminen, P Omvik, S Oparil, H 29 
Wedel, and LIFE Study Group, 2002, Cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in the Losartan 30 
Intervention For Endpoint reduction in hypertension study (LIFE): a randomised trial against 31 
atenolol, Lancet, 359(9311): 995-1003.  32 
 33 
Dmitrienko A, AC Tamhane, and BL Wiens, 2008, General Multistage Gatekeeping Procedures, 34 
Biometrical Journal, 50: 667-677. 35 
 36 
Dmitrienko A, AC Tamhane, and F Bretz, 2010, Multiple testing problems in pharmaceutical 37 
statistics, Boca Raton (FL): Chapman & Hall/CRC. 38 
 39 
Dmitrienko A, D’Agostino RB, Huque MF. Key multiplicity issues in clinical drug development. 40 
Statistics in Medicine 2013; 32: 1079–1111. 41 
 42 
Dmitrienko A, D’Agostino RB. Tutorial in Biostatistics: Traditional multiplicity adjustment 43 
methods in clinical trials. Statistics in Medicine 2013; 32(29): 5172-5218. 44 
 45 
Hochberg Y. A sharper Bonferroni procedure for multiple tests of significance. Biometrika 1988; 46 
75: 800-802. 47

--- Page 19 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 16 
 48 
Hochberg Y and AC Tamhane, 1987, Multiple Comparison Procedures, New York (NY): John 49 
Wiley & Sons. 50 
 51 
Holm SA, 1979, A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure, Scandinavian Journal of 52 
Statistics, 6(2): 65-70. 53 
 54 
Hommel G, F Bretz, and W Maurer, 2011, Multiple hypotheses testing based on ordered p values 55 
— a historical survey with applications to medical research, Journal of Biopharmaceutical 56 
Statistics, 21(4): 595-609. 57 
 58 
Hung HMJ and SJ Wang, 2010, Challenges to multiple testing in clinical trials, Biometrical 59 
Journal, 52(6): 747-756.  60 
 61 
Huque MF, 2016, Validity of the Hochberg procedure revisited for clinical trial applications, 62 
Statistics in Medicine, 35(1):5-20. 63 
 64 
Huque MF, M Alosh, and R Bhore, 2011, Addressing multiplicity issues of a composite endpoint 65 
and its components in clinical trials, Journal of Biopharmaceutical Statistics, 21: 610-634. 66 
 67 
Huque MF, A Dmitrienko, and RB D’Agostino, 2013, Multiplicity issues in clinical trials with 68 
multiple objectives, Statistics in Biopharmaceutical Research, 5(4): 321-337. 69 
 70 
Guidance for industry E9 Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials (September 1998) 71 
 72 
Guidance for industry E9(R1) Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials: Addendum: Estimands 73 
and Sensitivity Analysis in Clinical Trials (October 2017) 74 
 75 
Lubsen J and BA Kirwan, 2002, Combined endpoints: can we use them?, Statistics in Medicine, 76 
21: 2959–2970. 77 
 78 
Moye LA, 2000, Alpha calculus in clinical trials: considerations and commentary for the new 79 
millennium, Statistics in Medicine, 19:767-779. 80 
 81 
Moye LA, 2003, Multiple Analyses in Clinical Trials, New York (NY): Springer-Verlag. 82 
 83 
O’Neill RT, 1997, Secondary endpoints cannot be validly analyzed if the primary endpoint does 84 
not demonstrate clear statistical significance, Controlled Clinical Trials, 18: 550-556. 85 
 86 
Pocock SJ, CA Ariti, TJ Collier, and D Wang, 2012, The win ratio: a new approach to the 87 
analysis of composite endpoints in clinical trials based on clinical priorities, European Heart 88 
Journal, 33: 176–182.  89 
 90 
Sarkar S and CK Chang, 1997, Simes’ method for multiple hypotheses testing with positively 91 
dependent test statistics, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 92: 1601-1608. 92 
 93

--- Page 20 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 17 
Westfall PH, RD Tobias, D Rom, RD Wolfinger, and Y Hochberg, 1999, Multiple Comparisons 94 
and Multiple Tests Using the SAS® System, Cary (NC): SAS Institute.  95 
 96 
Westfall PH and SS Young, 1993, Resampling Based Multiple Testing: Examples and Methods 97 
for P-value Adjustment, New York (NY): Wiley-Interscience.  98 
 99 
Wiens BL, 2003, A fixed sequence Bonferroni procedure for testing multiple endpoints, 100 
Pharmaceutical Statistics, 2: 211-215.101

--- Page 21 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 18 
APPENDIX: STATISTICAL METHODS 102 
  103 
This appendix presents some commonly used statistical methods and approaches for addressing 104 
multiplicity problems in controlled clinical trials that evaluate treatment effects on multiple 105 
endpoints. The methods listed in this appendix are not intended to be a comprehensive list of 106 
methods for controlling multiplicity; other approaches could be appropriate for specific 107 
situations. The choice of the method to use for a specific clinical trial will depend on the 108 
objectives and the design of the trial, as well as the knowledge of the drug being developed and 109 
the clinical setting. The method, however, should be decided upon prospectively. Because the 110 
considerations that go into the choice of multiplicity adjustment method can be complex and 111 
specific to individual product development programs, this guidance does not attempt to 112 
recommend any one method over another in most cases. Sponsors should consider the variety of 113 
methods available and in the prospective analysis plan select the most powerful method that is 114 
suitable for the design and objective of the study and maintains Type I error rate control.  115 
 116 
1. The Bonferroni Method  117 
  118 
The Bonferroni method is a single-step procedure that is commonly used, perhaps because of its 119 
simplicity and broad applicability. The drug is considered to have shown effects for each 120 
endpoint that succeeds on this test. The Holm and Hochberg methods (see below) are more 121 
powerful than the Bonferroni method for primary endpoints and are therefore preferable in many 122 
cases. However, sponsors might still wish to use the Bonferroni method for primary endpoints to 123 
maximize power for secondary endpoints or because the assumptions of the Hochberg method 124 
are not justified. 125 
  126 
The most common form of the Bonferroni method divides the available total  (typically 0.05 127 
two-sided) equally among the chosen endpoints. The method then concludes that a treatment 128 
effect is significant at the  level for each one of the m endpoints for which the endpoint’s p-129 
value is less than α/m. Thus, with two endpoints, the critical  for each endpoint is two-sided 130 
0.025. The Bonferroni test can also be performed with different weights assigned to endpoints, 131 
with the sum of the relative weights equal to 1.0 (e.g., 0.4, 0.3, 0.2, and 0.1 for four endpoints). 132 
These weights should be prespecified in the design of the trial, taking into consideration the 133 
clinical importance of the endpoints, the likelihood of success, or other factors.  134 
 135 
2. The Holm Procedure  136 
 137 
The Holm procedure is a multi-step step-down procedure; it is useful for endpoints with any 138 
degree of correlation. It is less conservative than the Bonferroni method because a success with 139 
the smallest p-value (at the same endpoint-specific alpha as the Bonferroni method) allows other 140 
endpoints to be tested at larger endpoint-specific alpha levels than does the Bonferroni method. 141 
The algorithm for performing this test is as follows: 142 
 143 
The endpoint p-values resulting from the completed study are first ordered from the smallest to 144 
the largest. Suppose that there are m endpoints to be tested and p(1) represents the smallest p-145 
value, p(2) the next-smallest p-value, p(3) the third-smallest p-value, and so on.  146 
 147

--- Page 22 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 19 
i. The test begins by comparing the smallest p-value, p(1), to α/m, the same threshold used 148 
in the equally-weighted Bonferroni correction. If this p(1) is less than α/m, the treatment 149 
effect for the endpoint associated with this p-value is considered significant.  150 
 151 
ii. The test then compares the next-smallest p-value, p(2), to an endpoint-specific alpha of 152 
the total alpha divided by the number of yet-untested endpoints (e.g., α/(m-1) for the 153 
second smallest p-value, a somewhat less conservative significance level). If p(2) < 154 
α/(m-1), then the treatment effect for the endpoint associated with this p(2) is also 155 
considered significant.  156 
  157 
iii. The test then compares the next ordered p-value, p(3), to α/(m-2), and so on until the last 158 
p-value (the largest p-value) is compared to α.  159 
 160 
iv. The procedure stops, however, whenever a step yields a non-significant result. Once an 161 
ordered p-value is not significant, the remaining larger p-values are not evaluated and 162 
cannot be considered as statistically significant.  163 
 164 
There is also a more general weighted version of Holm which allows unequal alpha allocation to 165 
the individual null hypotheses. 166 
 167 
3. The Hochberg Procedure 168 
  169 
The Hochberg procedure is a step-up testing procedure. It is more powerful than the Holm 170 
procedure (i.e., if a treatment effect is significant under Holm procedure it will be also significant 171 
under Hochberg procedure but not necessarily vice versa), but, unlike the Holm procedure, it 172 
controls the overall error rate only under certain assumptions. It compares the p-values to the 173 
same alpha critical values of α/m, α/(m-1), …, α, as the Holm procedure, but, in contrast to the 174 
Holm procedure, the Hochberg procedure is a step-up procedure. Instead of starting with the 175 
smallest p-value, the procedure starts with the largest p-value, which is compared to the largest 176 
endpoint-specific critical value (α). Also, essentially in the reverse of the Holm procedure, if the 177 
first test of hypothesis does not show statistical significance, testing proceeds to compare the 178 
second-largest p-value to the second-largest adjusted alpha value, α/2. Sequential testing 179 
continues in this manner until a p-value for an endpoint is statistically significant, whereupon the 180 
Hochberg procedure provides a conclusion of statistically significant treatment effects for that 181 
endpoint and all endpoints with smaller p-values. For example, when the largest p-value is less 182 
than α, then the method concludes that there are significant treatment effects for all endpoints. In 183 
another situation, when the largest p-value is not less than α, but the second-largest p-value is 184 
less than α/2, then the method concludes that treatment effects have been demonstrated for all 185 
endpoints except for the one associated with the largest p-value. 186 
 187 
The Bonferroni and the Holm procedures are well known for being assumption-free. The 188 
methods can be applied without concern for the endpoint types, their statistical distributions, and 189 
the type of correlation structure. The Hochberg procedure, on the other hand, is not assumption-190 
free in this way. The Hochberg procedure is known to provide adequate overall alpha-control for 191 
independent endpoint tests or for positively correlated dependent tests with standard test statistics 192 
in some cases (e.g., the test statistics are jointly bivariate normal). It is also a valid test procedure 193

--- Page 23 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 20 
when certain conditions are met. Various simulation experiments for the general case (e.g., for 194 
more than two endpoints with unequal correlation structures) indicate that the Hochberg 195 
procedure usually will, but is not guaranteed to, control the overall Type I error rate for 196 
positively correlated endpoints, but fails to do so for some negatively correlated tests (Sarkar et 197 
al. 1997, Huque 2016). 198 
  199 
4. Prospective Alpha Allocation Scheme 200 
 201 
The Prospective Alpha Allocation Scheme (PAAS) (Moye 2000) is a single-step method that has 202 
a slight advantage in power over the Bonferroni method. The method allows equal or unequal 203 
alpha allocations to all endpoints, but, as with the Bonferroni method, each specific endpoint 204 
receives a prospective allocation of a specific amount of the overall alpha. The alpha allocations 205 
are required to satisfy the equation: 206 
 207 
  (1 - α1)(1 – α2) … (1 – αk) … (1 – αm) = (1- α). 208 
 209 
Each element in this equation, (1 – αk), is the probability of correctly not rejecting the null 210 
hypothesis for the kth endpoint, when it is tested at the allocated alpha αk. This procedure is valid 211 
when the endpoints are independent or positively correlated, but the Type I error rate may be 212 
inflated when the endpoints are negatively correlated. This equation states the requirement that 213 
probability of correctly not rejecting all of the individual null hypotheses, calculated by 214 
multiplying each of the m probabilities together, should equal the selected goal (e.g., 0.95). The 215 
alpha allocation for any of the individual endpoint tests can be arbitrarily assigned, if desired, but 216 
the total group of allocations should always satisfy the above equation. In general, when arbitrary 217 
alpha allocations are made for some endpoints, at least the last endpoint’s alpha should be 218 
calculated in order to satisfy the overall equation. As stated earlier, the Bonferroni method relies 219 
upon a similar constraint-defining equation, except that for the Bonferroni method the sum of all 220 
the individual alphas should equal the overall alpha. 221 
  222 
5. The Fixed-Sequence Method  223 
 224 
In many studies, testing of the endpoints can be ordered in a specified sequence, often ranking 225 
them by clinical relevance or likelihood of success. A fixed-sequence statistical testing procedure 226 
tests endpoints in a predefined order, all at the same significance level alpha (e.g., α = 0.05), 227 
moving to the next endpoint only after a success on the previous endpoint. Such a testing 228 
procedure requires (1) prospective specification of the testing sequence and (2) no further testing 229 
once the sequence breaks; that is, further testing stops as soon as there is a failure of an endpoint 230 
in the sequence to show significance at level alpha (e.g., α = 0.05).  231 
  232 
The appeal of the fixed-sequence testing method is that it does not require any alpha adjustment 233 
of the individual tests. Its main drawback is that if a hypothesis in the sequence is not rejected, 234 
statistical significance cannot be achieved for the endpoints planned for the subsequent 235 
hypotheses, even if they have extremely small p-values. Suppose, for example, that in a study, 236 
the p-value for the first endpoint test in the sequence is p = 0.59, and the p-value for the second 237 
endpoint is p = 0.001; despite the apparent strong finding for the second endpoint, the result is 238 
not considered statistically significant. Ignoring the first endpoint’s result recreates the 239

--- Page 24 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 21 
multiplicity problem and causes inflation of the overall Type I error rate. For this example, other 240 
methods of controlling Type I error such as the Bonferroni method, would have shown an effect 241 
for the second endpoint.  242 
 243 
Thus, for the fixed-sequence method, carefully selecting the ordering of the tests of hypotheses is 244 
critical. A test early in the sequence that fails to show statistical significance will render the 245 
remainder of the endpoints not statistically significant. It is often not possible to determine a 246 
priori the best order for testing (Hung and Wang 2010), and there are other methods for 247 
addressing the multiplicity problem, which are described in the following subsections.  248 
 249 
6. Resampling-Based, Multiple-Testing Procedures  250 
 251 
When there is correlation among multiple endpoints, resampling (Westfall and Young 1993) is 252 
one general statistical approach that can provide more power than the methods described above 253 
to detect a true treatment effect while maintaining control of the overall Type I error rate, and the 254 
power increases as the correlation increases. With these methods, a distribution of the possible 255 
test-statistic values under the null hypothesis is generated based upon the observed data of the 256 
trial. This data-based distribution is then used to find the p-value of the observed study result 257 
instead of using a theoretical distribution of the test statistics (e.g., a normal distribution of Z-258 
scores, or a t-distribution for t-scores) as with most other methods. 259 
 260 
Resampling methods include the bootstrap and permutation approaches for multiple endpoints 261 
and require few, albeit important, assumptions about the true distribution of the endpoints. There 262 
are, however, some drawbacks to these methods. The important assumptions are generally 263 
difficult to verify, particularly for small study sample sizes. These methods, consequently, 264 
usually require large study sample sizes (particularly bootstrap methods) and often require 265 
simulations to ensure the data-based distribution of the test statistics from the limited trial data is 266 
applicable and to ensure adequate Type I error rate control. Inflation of the Type I error rate may 267 
occur, for example, if the shape of the data distribution is different between the treatment groups 268 
being compared.  269 
 270 
7. Gatekeeping Testing Strategies 271 
 272 
Gatekeeping procedures (e.g., Dmitrienko et al. 2008, Dmitrienko and D’Agostino 2013) address 273 
the problems of testing hierarchically ordered families of null hypotheses. Families usually 274 
correspond to primary and secondary objectives in a clinical trial (see section III.A.). Inferences 275 
in each family depend on the acceptance or rejection of null hypotheses in the earlier families 276 
consistent with logical relationships that may exist among the null hypotheses. The relationships 277 
usually reflect the relevant clinical considerations and are specified using a set of logical 278 
restrictions. Different types of logical gatekeeping constraints have been studied including serial 279 
gatekeeping, parallel gatekeeping and their generalization referred to as tree-structured 280 
gatekeeping. 281 
 282 
A serial strategy can be applied, for example, in the scenario where the endpoints of the primary 283 
family are tested as co-primary endpoints (section III.C.). If all endpoints in the primary family 284 
are statistically significant at the alpha level (e.g., α = 0.05), the endpoints in the second family 285

--- Page 25 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 22 
are examined. The endpoints in the second family can be tested at the overall alpha level by any 286 
prespecified acceptable method (e.g., Holm procedure, the fixed-sequence method, or others 287 
described in this appendix) that controls Type I error rate within the second family. If, however, 288 
at least one of the null hypotheses of the primary family fails to be rejected, the primary family 289 
criterion has not been met and the secondary endpoint family is not tested. 290 
  291 
A parallel gatekeeping strategy is applied when the endpoints in the primary family are not all 292 
co-primary endpoints, and a separable testing method (e.g., Bonferroni method or Truncated 293 
Holm method) is specified for the primary family. In this strategy, the second endpoint family is 294 
examined when at least one of the endpoints in the first family has shown statistical significance.  295 
 296 
Some multiplicity problems are multidimensional. One dimension may correspond to multiple 297 
endpoints, a second to multiple-dose groups (that have each of those endpoints tested), and yet 298 
another dimension to multiple hypotheses regarding an endpoint, such as non-inferiority and 299 
superiority tests (for each dose and each endpoint). The multiple sources of multiplicity create 300 
the potential for multiple pathways of testing the hypotheses. For example, if the goal of a study 301 
is to demonstrate non-inferiority as well as superiority, a single path of sequential tests is 302 
preferred. Suppose, however, that one wants to analyze a second endpoint for non-inferiority 303 
after the first endpoint is successfully shown to be non-inferior. The testing path now branches 304 
into two paths from this initial test (i.e., testing superiority for the first endpoint and non-305 
inferiority for the second endpoint).  306 
 307 
The multi-branched gatekeeping procedure allows for ordering the sequence of testing with the 308 
option of testing of more than one endpoint if a preceding test is successful. When there are 309 
multiple levels of this sequential hierarchy, and branching is applied at several of the steps, the 310 
possible paths of endpoint testing become a complex, multi-branched structure. 311 
 312 
As a simple illustration (Figure A1), consider a clinical trial that compares a treatment to control 313 
on two primary endpoints (Endpoint 1 and Endpoint 2) to determine first whether the treatment 314 
is non-inferior to the control for at least one endpoint. If, for either of the two endpoints, the 315 
treatment is found non-inferior to the control, there is also a desire to test whether it is superior to 316 
control for that endpoint. The analytic plan for the trial thus sets the following logical 317 
restrictions:  318 
 319 
i. Test endpoint two only after non-inferiority for endpoint one is first established.  320 
 321 
ii.  Test for superiority on an endpoint only after non-inferiority for that endpoint is first 322 
concluded.  323 
 324 
The following diagram shows the decision structure of the test strategy. In this diagram, each 325 
block (or node) states the null hypothesis that it tests.  326 
 327 
 328 
 329

--- Page 26 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 23 
 330 
 331 
Figure A1: Example of a flow diagram for non-inferiority and superiority tests for endpoints one and two of a trial 332 
with logical restrictions, where α1 + α2 = α. To test for superiority for Endpoint 1 and/or 2, one should first establish 333 
non-inferiority for that endpoint. 334 
 335 
Thus, the above test strategy has a two-dimensional hierarchical structure, one dimension for the 336 
two different endpoints and the other for the non-inferiority and superiority tests, with the logical 337 
restrictions as stated above. Note that for this type of procedure, if multiple branches split off 338 
from a single node, the alpha should be split across the multiple branches. 339 
 340 
8. Graphical Approaches Based on Sequentially Rejective Tests  341 
  342 
The graphical approach (e.g., Bretz et al. 2009) is a means for developing and evaluating 343 
multiple analysis strategies for Bonferroni-based sequentially rejective methods. This approach 344 
illustrates differences in endpoint importance as well as the relationships among the endpoints by 345 
mapping onto a test strategy that ensures control of the Type I error rate and aids in creating and 346 
evaluating alternative test strategies.  347 
 348 
Graphical displays of complex analysis strategies can aid in describing and assessing the 349 
proposed plan by displaying all the logical relationships among endpoint tests of hypotheses.  350 
 351 
Basics of the Graphical Approach: Use of vertex (node) and path (order or direction) 352 
 353 
In the graphical approach, the testing strategy is defined by a figure (graph) that shows each of 354 
the hypotheses (H1, H2,..., Hm) located at a vertex (or node, a junction of testing order paths). 355 
Each vertex (hypothesis) is allocated an initial amount of alpha, which this document defines as 356 
the endpoint-specific alpha (with the understanding that a test of an endpoint is associated with a 357 
test of a hypothesis, and vice versa). A key requirement is that the sum of all of the endpoint-358 
specific alpha levels is equal to the total alpha level available for the study (the overall Type I 359 
error rate). At each step of the algorithm, endpoints are tested at the endpoint-specific 360 
significance levels using Bonferroni procedure. 361 
 362 
Another feature of the figure (graph) is a set of directed edges. Each directed edge (or arrow) 363 
connects two hypotheses and is assigned a value between 0 and 1, called a weight for that edge 364 
and shown above the arrow, which indicates the fraction of the preserved alpha to be shifted 365 
H3: treatment inferior to 
control for Endpoint 2 (i.e., 
test for non-inferiority) 
H2: treatment not superior to 
control for Endpoint 1 (i.e., 
test for superiority) 
H1: treatment inferior to 
control for Endpoint 1 (i.e., 
test for non-inferiority) 
H4: treatment not superior to 
control for Endpoint 2 (i.e., 
test for superiority) 
α1 
α2 
α2

--- Page 27 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 24 
along that path to the receiving hypothesis, when the hypothesis at the tail end of the path is 366 
successful (i.e., is rejected). The sum of the weights across all the paths leaving a vertex should 367 
be 1.0, so that the entire preserved alpha is used in testing subsequent hypotheses. All study 368 
hypotheses that are intended to potentially provide firm conclusions of efficacy are shown in the 369 
graph.  370 
 371 
Several examples of the graphical method follow to help illustrate the concept, construction, 372 
interpretation, and application of these diagrams.  373 
 374 
Fixed-Sequence Method 375 
 376 
The fixed-sequence testing strategy (appendix section 5.), shown in Figure A2, illustrates a 377 
simple case of the graphical method with three hypotheses. In this scheme, the endpoints 378 
(hypotheses) are ordered. Testing begins with the first endpoint at the full alpha level and 379 
continues through the sequence only until an endpoint is not statistically significant. This 380 
diagram shows that the endpoint-specific alpha levels associated with hypotheses H1, H2, and H3 381 
are set in the beginning as α, 0, and 0. For the fixed-sequence method, arrows represent the 382 
sequence of testing, and if the test is successful, the full alpha is shifted along to the next test. 383 
Consequently, if null hypothesis H1 is successfully rejected, the endpoint-specific alpha level for 384 
H2 becomes 0 + 1  α = α, which allows testing of H2 at level α. However, if the test of H1 is 385 
unsuccessful, there is no pre-assigned non-zero alpha for H2 to allow testing of H2, so the testing 386 
stops. 387 
 388 
H1
α 
H2
0
H3
0
1 1
389 
Figure A2: Graphical illustration of the fixed-sequence testing with three hypotheses. 390 
 391 
  392

--- Page 28 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 25 
Loop-Back Feature to Indicate Two-Way Potential for Retesting  393 
 394 
Another valuable feature of the graphical method occurs when the available alpha level is split 395 
between two or more endpoints into endpoint-specific alpha levels; these diagrams illustrate the 396 
potential for loop-back passing of endpoint-specific alpha. 397 
 398 
The Holm procedure (appendix section 2.) is a specific case of tests for two hypotheses with a 399 
loop-back feature where the graphical method enables a simple depiction of the procedure and its 400 
rationale. The Holm procedure directs that the first step is to test the smaller p-value at endpoint-401 
specific alpha = α/2 and, only if successful, proceed to test the larger p-value at the level α (e.g., 402 
0.05). Because the Holm procedure splits alpha evenly in half, if the test of hypothesis with the 403 
smaller p-value was not significant, it is clear that the test with the larger p-value will also fail to 404 
be significant; performing that comparison is unnecessary. The diagram for the Holm procedure 405 
(Figure A3), shows two vertices and associated endpoint-specific alpha levels of α1 = 0.025 and 406 
α2 = 0.025, respectively, satisfying the requirement for total alpha = 0.05. The two arrows show 407 
that alpha might be passed along from H1 to H2, or H2 to H1. If the first test is successful, the 408 
endpoint-specific alpha of 0.025 is shifted entirely to the other hypothesis and added to the 409 
endpoint-specific alpha already allocated for that hypothesis to provide a net alpha of 0.05. 410 
Because either hypothesis might be tested first, the diagram shows a loop-back configuration.  411 
 412 
H1
α1 = 0.025
H2
α2 = 0.025
1
1
 413 
 414 
Figure A3: Graphical illustration of the Holm procedure with two hypotheses. 415 
 416 
Testing on the diagram can start at any of the vertices that have non-zero alpha in the initial 417 
diagram, and all vertices with non-zero alpha can be tested until one is found for which the test is 418 
successful (i.e., the hypothesis is rejected). Then, the respective node is removed, and the alpha 419 
allocated to the rejected hypothesis propagates to other nodes following the arrows, as directed in 420 
the diagram. The final conclusions of which hypotheses were rejected and which were not will 421 
be the same irrespective of which vertex was inspected first. The graphical method enables 422 
complex alpha-splitting and branching of testing path features to be clearly identified as part of 423 
the analysis plan and correctly implemented. 424 
  425 
Progressive Updating of the Diagram When Hypotheses Are Successfully Rejected 426 
 427 
The graphical approach guides the hierarchical testing of multiple hypotheses through continual 428 
updating of the initial graph whenever a hypothesis is successfully rejected. The initial graph 429 
represents the full testing strategy (with all hypotheses). Each new graph shows the progression 430

--- Page 29 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 26 
of the testing strategy by eliminating hypotheses that have been rejected and retaining those yet 431 
to be tested or re-tested.  432 
 433 
When there is a desire to consider analysis strategies with complex division of alpha, the 434 
graphical method and progressive updating of the diagram can aid in understanding the 435 
implication of the different strategies for a variety of different hypothetical scenarios. This 436 
progressive updating can aid in selecting which specific strategy to select for the final study 437 
statistical analysis plan.  438